Cube docs (#277)
zazuko/barnard59: packages/cube/README.md

## Commands

The package provides pipelines to retrieve and validate cube observations and metadata.

Once `barnard59-cube` is installed, run `barnard59 cube` to list the pipelines available as CLI commands.
You can get help on each one, for example, `barnard59 cube fetch-cube --help`

### fetch cube

Pipeline `fetch-cube` queries a given SPARQL endpoint to retrieve all the data and metadata of a given cube.

```bash
barnard59 cube fetch-cube \
    --cube https://agriculture.ld.admin.ch/agroscope/PRIFm8t15/2 \
    --endpoint https://int.lindas.admin.ch/query \
```
For big cubes, it is advisable to use the other fetch commands to get the cube parts separately (for example `fetch-metadata` and `fetch-observations`).

### fetch constraint

Pipeline `fetch-constraint` queries a given SPARQL endpoint to retrieve the [constraint shape](https://cube.link/#constraints) of a given cube.

```bash
barnard59 cube fetch-constraint \
  --cube https://agriculture.ld.admin.ch/agroscope/PRIFm8t15/2 \
  --endpoint https://int.lindas.admin.ch/query
```

### fetch metadata

Pipeline `fetch-metadata` queries a given SPARQL endpoint to retrieve 

> a concise bounded description of a given cube and its constraint (excluding the observations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cube metadata and its [constraint shape](https://cube.link/#constraints) (excluding the observations).
```

## Installation

```
npm install barnard59-cube
```

## Operations

### `toObservation`

A pipeline step can use `toObservation` to create

> cube observations according to the [cube.link](https://cube.link/) specification. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A pipeline can use `toObservation` operation to create
cube observations according to the [Cube Schema](https://cube.link/) specification. 
```

> Each input chunk is expected to be a dataset (or quads array)
> with data for a single observation (usually obtained from a CSVW mapping).
> The operation cleans up the data, adding suitable defaults and identifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each input chunk is expected to be a dataset (or an array of quads)
with data for a single observation (usually obtained from a CSVW mapping).
The operation cleans up the data, adding suitable defaults and identifiers.
```

### `buildCubeShape`

> The `buildCubeShape` operation derives a SHACL shape from observations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `buildCubeShape` operation derives a SHACL shape from a stream of observations.
```

> Each input chunk is expected to be a dataset (or quads array)
> representing a single observation (usually obtained with `toObservation`).
> The operation collects information about the values of observation properties and propagates the chunk.
> Once the input stream is over, it creates and emits a shape describing the properties of the observations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each input chunk is expected to be a dataset (or an array of quads)
representing a single observation (usually obtained with [`toObservation`](#toObservation)).
The operation collects information about the values of observation properties and propagates the chunk.
Once the input stream is over, it creates and emits a shape describing the properties of the observations.
```

## Commands

The package provides pipelines to retrieve and validate cube observations and metadata.

Once `barnard59-cube` is installed, run `barnard59 cube` to list the pipelines available as CLI commands.
You can get help on each one, for example, `barnard59 cube fetch-cube --help`

### fetch cube

Pipeline `fetch-cube` queries a given SPARQL endpoint to retrieve all the data and metadata of a given cube.

```bash
barnard59 cube fetch-cube \
    --cube https://agriculture.ld.admin.ch/agroscope/PRIFm8t15/2 \
    --endpoint https://int.lindas.admin.ch/query \
```

> For big cubes, it is advisable to use the other fetch commands to separately get the cube parts (for example `fetch-metadata` and `fetch-observations`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For big cubes, it is advisable to use the other fetch commands to get the cube parts separately (for example `fetch-metadata` and `fetch-observations`).
```

### fetch constraint

> Pipeline `fetch-constraint` queries a given SPARQL endpoint to retrieve 
> a [concise bounded description](https://docs.stardog.com/query-stardog/#describe-queries) of the constraint of a given cube.

Reviewer: I don't think it's really important that we're fetching CBD.

Also, it is a Stardog-specific detail we need to remove in the future with a more targeted `CONSTRUCT` query

```suggestion
Pipeline `fetch-constraint` queries a given SPARQL endpoint to retrieve the [constraint shape](https://cube.link/#constraints) of a given cube.
```

```bash
barnard59 cube fetch-constraint \
  --cube https://agriculture.ld.admin.ch/agroscope/PRIFm8t15/2 \
  --endpoint https://int.lindas.admin.ch/query
```

### fetch metadata

Pipeline `fetch-metadata` queries a given SPARQL endpoint to retrieve 

> a concise bounded description of a given cube and its constraint (excluding the observations).

Reviewer: Ditto about CBD

```bash
barnard59 cube fetch-metadata \
  --cube https://agriculture.ld.admin.ch/agroscope/PRIFm8t15/2 \
  --endpoint https://int.lindas.admin.ch/query \
> metadata.ttl
```

### fetch observations

Pipeline `fetch-observations` queries a given SPARQL endpoint to retrieve the observations of a given cube.

```bash
barnard59 cube fetch-observations \
    --cube https://agriculture.ld.admin.ch/agroscope/PRIFm8t15/2 \
    --endpoint https://int.lindas.admin.ch/query \
 > observations.ttl
```

The output of all the fetch pipelines is written to `stdout` and can be redirected to a local file as in the last examples.

### check metadata

Pipeline `check-metadata` validates the input metadata against the shapes provided with the `--profile` option (the default profile is https://cube.link/latest/shape/standalone-constraint-constraint).

> The pipeline reads the metadata from `stdin`, allowing input from a local file (as in the following example) as well as directly from the output of the `fetch-metadata` pipeline (in most cases it's useful to have the metadata in a local file because it's needed also for the `check-observations` pipeline).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pipeline reads the metadata from `stdin`, allowing input from a local file (as in the following example), as well as directly from the output of the `fetch-metadata` pipeline. In most cases it's useful to have the metadata in a local file because it's needed also for the `check-observations` pipeline.
```

```bash
cat metadata.ttl \
| barnard59 cube check-metadata \
    --profile https://cube.link/v0.1.0/shape/standalone-constraint-constraint
```
SHACL reports with violations are written to `stdout`.

> In cases when a remote address given to the `--profile` option does not include a correct `content-type` header (or does not provide a `content-type` header at all), the pipeline will fail. In such cases, it is possible to use the `--profileFormat` option to select the correct RDF parser. Its value must be a media type, such as `text/turtle`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In cases when `--profile` is a remote address which does not include a correct `content-type` header, the pipeline will fail. In such cases, it is possible to use the `--profileFormat` option to select the correct RDF parser. Its value must be a media type, such as `text/turtle`.
```

To leverage streaming, input is split and validated in little batches of adjustable size (the default is 50 and likely it's appropriate in most cases). This allows the validation of very big cubes because observations are not loaded in memory all at once. To ensure triples for the same observation are adjacent (hence processed in the same batch), the input is sorted by subject (and in case the input is large the sorting step relies on temporary local files).

> SHACL reports with violations are written to `stdout`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SHACL reports are written to `stdout`.
```
